# Raw Data Citations For GeoSpatial Dataset

---

New entries should follow the following structure:

### Name-of-Dataset
PATH: {path_to_file_from_root} 

URL: {url_from_download}

Description of dataset goes here.

---

## CDC Death Index:
### Mortality Multiple Cause-of-Death data

The user guide of using each year’s Mortality Multiple Cause-of-Death data is below:

https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/mortality_public_use_data.htm

As the example of the most recent year 2017’s user guide, which named Multiple_Cause_Record_Layout_2017.pdf, it contains two sets 

of data, one is U.S. Data without geospatial information but detailed on each diagnose. 

Another is U.S. Territories Data which includes all county/states/FIPS info. 

PATH: data/raw/CDC_MORTALITY

url: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/mortality_public_use_data.htm

The original datasets are generated by CDC in their own DPSMCPUB type, so the first thing is that mapping this specific type to original csv files.




## U.S. Census:

### State/County Intercensal 1999:

**CLEANED PANDAS READY CSV @:** data/clean/CENSUS_COUNTYLEVEL/1999_StateCountyIntercensal.csv

PATH: data/raw/CENSUS_COUNTYLEVEL/1999_StateCountyIntercensal/

URL: https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/time-series/demo/popest/intercensal-1990-2000-state-and-county-characteristics.html

Intercensal State and County Characteristics Population Estimates with 1990-Base Race 
Groups 

Population Estimates Branch, U.S. Bureau of the Census

There is one file for each of the ten years in the intercensal series 1990-1999.  Each file contains 
bridged –race estimates of the July 1 resident population by State, county, race (White, Black or 
African American, American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian or Pacific Islander), age group (< 1 year, 
1-4 years, 5-9 years, 10-14 years, …, 80-84 years, 85 years and over), sex, and Hispanic origin (not 
Hispanic or Latino, Hispanic or Latino).  

The dataset format file can be found under stch-intercensal_layout.txt

The raw dataset can be found under stch-icen1999.txt

---

### County Characteristic Intercensal For 2000 Through 2010:
PATH: data/raw/CENSUS_COUNTYLEVEL/2000-2010_CountyCharacteristicIntercensal/

URL: https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/time-series/demo/popest/intercensal-2000-2010-counties.html

The April 1, 2000 Population Estimates base reflects changes to the Census 2000 population from the Count Question 
Resolution program and geographic program revisions.
The original race data from Census 2000 are modified to reclassify the Some Other Race category. 
This modification is used for all Census Bureau estimates products and is explained in the document 
entitled "Modified Race Data Summary File Technical Documentation and ASCII Layout" that can be found 
on the Census Bureau website at http://www.census.gov/popest/research/modified.html.
The data source for April 1, 2010 is the 2010 Census count. The original race data from the 2010 Census 
are modified to reclassify the Some Other Race category. 
For more information see http://www.census.gov/popest/methodology/2000-2010_Intercensal_Estimates_Methodology.pdf.
The values for July 1, 2010 were produced by applying estimates of change in the population between April 1 
and July 1 of 2010 to the 2010 Census counts. Further details on this methodology 
are available at http://www.census.gov/popest/methodology/2000-2010_Intercensal_Estimates_Methodology.pdf.

The raw dataset is contained over a number of text files in the directory.

The documentation for the headers of the data can be found under the file co-est00int-alldata-4-25-13.pdf.

---

### Count Characterisitics Estimates For 2010 Through 2018
PATH: data/raw/CENSUS_COUNTYLEVEL/2010-2018_CountyCharacteristicEstimates/

URL: https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/time-series/demo/popest/2010s-counties-detail.html


Each year, the United States Census Bureau produces and publishes estimates of the population for the nation, states, 
counties, state/county equivalents, and Puerto Rico. We estimate the resident population for each year since the most 
recent decennial census by using measures of population change. The resident population includes all people currently 
residing in the United States.

With each annual release of population estimates, the Population Estimates program revises and updates the entire time 
series of estimates from April 1, 2010 to July 1 of the current year, which we refer to as the vintage year. We use the
term “vintage” to denote an entire time series created with a consistent population starting point and methodology. 
The release of a new vintage of estimates supersedes any previous series and incorporates the most up-to-date input data
and methodological improvements.

The population estimates are used for federal funding allocations, as controls for major surveys including the Current
Population Survey and the American Community Survey, for community development, to aid business planning, and as denominators
for statistical rates. Overall, our estimates time series from 2000 to 2010 was very accurate, even accounting for ten years
of population change. The average absolute difference between the final total resident population estimates and 2010 Census
counts was only about 3.1 percent across all counties.

The documentation for the headers of the data can be found under co-est2018-alldata.pdf.

The raw dataset can be found under the file co-est2018-alldata.csv.

---

### County Business Patterns: 1999-2017
PATH: data/raw/CENSUS_COUNTYLEVEL/`year`_CountyBusinessPatterns/  
- where `year` is some year between 1999 and 2017

URL: https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/cbp/data/datasets.html

This series includes the number of establishments, employment during the week, first quarter payroll, and annual 
payroll. This data is useful for studying the economic activity of small areas; analyzing economic changes over 
time; and as a benchmark for other statistical series, surveys, and databases between economic censuses. 
Businesses use the data for analyzing market potential, measuring the effectiveness of sales and advertising 
programs, setting sales quotas, and developing budgets. Government agencies use the data for administration and planning.

Each yearly directory contains a formating file called county_layout_`year`.txt.

Each yearly directory contains a raw dataset filed called cbp`year`co.txt.


## Other Datasets:

### CDC County Zipcode/Country Cross Reference
PATH: data/raw/ZIPS_TO_FIPS/

URL: https://wonder.cdc.gov/wonder/sci_data/codes/fips/type_txt/cntyxref.asp

The County Cross Reference File is a product which provides a
relationship between ZIP+4 codes and Federal Information
Processing Standard (FIPS) county codes.  The file allows users
who have assigned ZIP+4 codes to their address files to obtain
county data at the ZIP+4 level.

The documentation for the dataset is found under the file Zipcode2Fips.txt.

The raw dataset is contained over a number of text files named zipcty{N}.txt.

---

### GEOPANDAS-READY JSON of U.S. County Geometries
PATH: data/counties.geojson

This dataframe was extracted from plotly's county-choropleth package.
It containes the GeoPandas data for all counties in the United States 
uniquely identified along FIPS codes. The geometries can be manipulated using 
GeoPandas to calculate neighbors, centroids, area, and perimeters of counties.

The extraction was done with the following script:

```clojure
# Hy
(import [plotly.figure-factory :as foo])

(setv county-choro foo.-county-choropleth 
      df (-> (county-choro.-create-us-counties-df 
                county-choro.st-to-state-name-dict 
                county-choro.state-to-st-dict)
             (get 0)))
             
(.to-file df "data/counties.geojson" :driver "GeoJSON")
```
To import the dataframe using GeoPandas in Python3 use:

```Python
import geopandas as gp

df = gp.read_file("data/counties.geojson" :driver "GeoJSON")
```
